+++
draft = false
title = 'Terminal Tools'
readingTime = false
ToC = true
+++

> Just some notes on tools I frequently use in the terminal.

## ffmpeg

### Converting MKV to MP4

Sometimes I take screen recordings and post them on GitLab for my team to reference. I use OBS which by default saves recordings to MKV files, but they display better in GitLab as MP4 files. This a command to convert MKV files to MP4 files:

```bash {caption="Generated by ChatGPT"}
ffmpeg -i input.mkv -c:v libx264 -c:a aac output.mp4
```

## git

### Displaying last touched branches

I tend to create a lot of prototyping branches for features I'm working on, especially ones that require more complex implementations. Over the course of a few months, I can generate a dozen or so branches, most of which are stale. I run this bash script in my Git repo to list all of the remote branches I have last touched and delete the ones that are no longer needed.

```bash {caption="Generated by ChatGPT"}
for branch in $(git for-each-ref --format='%(refname:short)' refs/remotes/); do
  email=$(git log -1 --pretty=format:'%ae' "$branch")
  if [ "$email" = "$(git config user.email)" ]; then
    echo "$branch"
  fi
done
```

And this does the same except for local branches:
```bash
for branch in $(git for-each-ref --format='%(refname:short)' refs/heads/); do
  email=$(git log -1 --pretty=format:'%ae' "$branch")
  if [ "$email" = "$(git config user.email)" ]; then
    echo "$branch"
  fi
done
```

## helix

Modal text editor.

### How to align selections

- Select items and then hit `&`.

### Repeat last motion (`f`, `t`, `m`, `[` or `]`)

- `Alt-.`

## tr

### Converting text to lowercase

```bash
echo "YOUR STRING" | tr '[:upper:]' '[:lower:]'
```

## zellij

Terminal multiplexer.

### Horizontal split on a pane

Some times when I create a new pane using `<Alt-n>`, it uses a vertical split rather than a horizontal split.

To do a horizontal split do: `<Ctrl-g>, p, <Alt-g>, d`.

Note: This works as of [this configuration](https://github.com/asungy/loadout/blob/e06a468456e4c3079bd83b6f0805994bdf29e8f8/home/config/zellij/config.kdl).

## Allow OSC52 support for Zellij and Helix (SSH clipboard support)
- Ghostty already supports this out of the box.
- For Zellij, make sure the "copy_command" option is not set in the configuration.
- For Helix, do
```toml
[editor]
clipboard-provider = "termcode"
```