+++
title = "Do Not Use AI to Learn Multivariable Calculus"
# Run the following command to generate the current date: `date -u +"%Y-%m-%dT%H:%M:%SZ"`
date = "2025-07-04T17:04:14Z"
description = "I had to bomb a quiz to really learn my lesson."
showFullContent = false
readingTime = true
hideComments = false
ToC = false
math = true
+++

When I started my first class for my master's program, things were going pretty smooth. I always get this uneasy feeling just as a semester starts because in my undergraduate years, things always start out easy and then somewhere a few weeks in I feel like I'm drowning. However, the difference between now and about a decade ago is that I have access to state of the art large language models. But it wasn't until I was in the thick of things did I learn the true value of what "state-of-the-art" really means in 2025 and the cost of outsourcing one's cognitive abilities.

My multivariable calculus class started out rather gentle. This was nice because juggling family responsibilities and work and adding on top of that a continued education seems like it was going to be a lot, but I somehow managed everything quite well. The beginning subjects included matrices and their operations, vector spaces, determinants, then eigenvalue problems. At this stage, because I already had some exposure to these subjects in my undergraduate curriculum, I could just jump right into the practice problems, figure those out quite easily on my own, and then ace the quizzes. The quizzes were unproctored but timed, and a large portion of the grade depended on work that had to be handwritten and submitted.

It wasn't until the course started discussing vector differential calculus did I feel the need to turn to LLMs for some assistance. My strategy going into this course was just to focus on doing the recommended problem sets each week. The professor claimed that if you could do those, you will do well in the class because those are the hardest problems that you will see in the course. So in the beginning I didn't even watch the posted lectures. I just tried the problems and if I couldn't do them, I would go back in the book and do the necessary reading that would help me solve the current problem I was on and move on. And this strategy was working. But vector differential calculus was a slightly new idea for me. Prior to this class, things like divergence and curl of a vector field were foreign and I turned to LLMs to help clarify some confusion I was having on the topics.

Then I got to vector integral calculus and things started to slip. I started to become more and more dependent on using LLMs to solve the weekly problem sets. And as I used LLMs more and more, the chapters in the textbook became more and more obscure to me. This was probably due in part to the concepts were actually getting more difficult, but also the fact that I haven't been developing the ability to read mathematics and think about the complex ideas behind them. I was just optimizing to be able to solve problems through sheer brute force  without thinking about _what_ I was actually solving.

But the rude awakening for me was when the LLMs just broke. Not due to OpenAI or Anthropic's services deteriorating or anything like. But starting from simple line and surface integrals to triple integrals from Gauss's Divergence Theorem and Stokes's Theorem, it just completely broke the models to the point where they were convinced they were solving the questions correctly, but they made absolutely no sense, and would eventually circle back to their same line of erroneous thinking when trying to nudge them in the right direction. I thought the most frustrating (albeit slightly humorous) part is when they just flat out refused to solve an integral by hand. Mind you, these were the "more advanced" model that I paid a subscription to use. But nevertheless, they would just ignore my request, saying it was too hard, and write a Python script to numerically compute the value of the integral and provide me that answer. I eventually ended up having to talk to a human professor during office hours to clear up the misconceptions that I (and apparently the LLMs) was having.

At this point, I became completely distrustful of the LLMs and stopped using them. But by now, I was in a huge learning deficit. I wasted too much time trying to get the LLMs to help me learn vector integral calculus instead of actually just learning the goddamn thing myself. I had to take a quiz on line integrals and Green's Theorem by a certain deadline, but it was too late for me to catch up. I had to take it and do the best I could. Needless to say, that quiz took a big steamy shit on me. I was eating shit for the whole two hours and some change that was allotted to complete the quiz.

Luckily, my current grade is high enough where a bomb like this shouldn't be the end of the world, but I think it'll certainly make its mark. I haven't gotten the grade back, but I _know_ for sure it's not great. I think going forward I just need to start with the lectures, then do the readings (but don't spend too much time on them), and then tackle the weekly problem set. The real problem is finding the time to go through all the content and solve an adequate number of problems to feel the material really solidify. But that's just how things have always been. You have to work for it and an LLM can only do so much.
